---
title: Critical Reflections - Plant Radio
tags: [CART 360]
created: 2024-12-04T01:40:02.693Z
modified: 2024-12-04T04:31:08.861Z
---

# Critical Reflections - Plant Radio

What happens when one attempts to design objects and experiences that disregard humans? When so much of our world centres ourselves, it can be hard for one to remember that other beings are just as worthy of respect and attention. A group of researchers at Aarhus University, working as part of the Growing Co-design research project set out to integrate such posthumanist ideas by creating a radio capable of sonifying a plant's internal signals. In order to achieve this goal, they made various design decisions that actively inconvenience, and even remove agency from, the human "users". This denial of agency, by harnessing abjection, has fascinating potential for exploring posthumanist ideas in interaction design.

The specific object created by the researchers at Aarhus University is what they describe as a plant radio. It is an object that utilizes EMG sensors to read electrical data from a plant, data which changes over the course of a day with the time of day, light, and activity near the plant. The radio in turn sonifies and visualizes the data, interpreting it as sound waves that it outputs via speakers, as well as controlling a set of LEDs on the top. In order to imbue the plant radio with posthumanist theory, the researchers made decisions that centred the plant, sometimes instead of the humans in the vicinity. One such decision was to not process the incoming data much, despite it resulting in rapidly changing and machinic sounds, potentially being "alienating or piercing" to humans. As such, it prevents a user from simply relegating the plant radio, and thus the plant itself, to the background, forcing them to pay attention. Another decision they made to emphasize these posthumanist ideas is that of not including a power switch. It does have a volume knob, allowing the sounds to be turned down somewhat. Aside from the plant radio running out of battery, however, it was designed such that a user would not be able to stop it completely. This denial of a user's agency in favour of an other entity's has great potential for provoking radical shifts in perspective for users.

Indeed, such a shift in perspective between one's self and other entities invokes a concept known as the abject. Defined by philosopher Julia Kristeva, the abject refers to that which disturbs the order between the subject and the object, the self, and the other. [] This concept was created to apply horror, and indeed, it is extremely common in the genre. One such example could be the video game 000000FF0000 by Kitty Horrorshow. [] Of relevance to the plant radio, this is a horror game that similarly removes agency from the player in order to provoke reflections on their subject/object relationship. To start off, the game is made to require non-trivial effort to even launch. It's Itch.io page is full of gibberish text. Upon downloading, one must navigate through half a dozen folders with gibberish names before coming across the game's executable files. Once one launches the game, the player is greeted with tremendously unpleasant aesthetics. It features discordant sounds, heavily glitched models, and architecture at inhumanly large scales. At seemingly random moments, the player is presented with distorted text which seemingly comes from the game itself, expressing pain, expressing anger at the player and imploring they leave. The overall effect is tremendously disorienting, engendering guilt in the player. Finally, at the game's conclusion, it merely quits itself, denying the player the agency of choosing when to leave. With this final choice of interaction design, the game has the effect of causing one to question their relationship to others. Even without another living creature involved, the effect is palpable.

unfinished
