---
title: Critical Reflections - Biofoam
tags: [CART 360]
created: 2024-12-03T22:35:41.542Z
modified: 2024-12-04T03:09:28.076Z
---

# Critical Reflections - Biofoam

In Exploring Biofoam as a Material for Tangible Interaction, the researchers from the University of Colorado Boulder present a case for biofoam as a valuable material for interaction design due to its sustainability. They make this case by recounting their various experiments with the material, in the process relaying various properties and their potential value to designers. Of particular note is biofoam's ephemeral nature. As a material that dissolves in water and can be completely biodegradable, it is one of relatively few materials that are uniquely suited for explorations of ephemeral themes.

Biofoam is defined in the paper as a biodegradable material composed of biomass that is low density, airy, and flexible. It is meant to be a more sustainable alternative to existing foams such as those used in packaging, bedding, sponges, etc. One of its main advantages, as presented, is that it is easy to obtain. The researchers made their foam themselves, following a base recipe including only ingredients that are easy to obtain. These were water, glycerine, gelatin, and dish soap. They also were all sourced semi-locally (within 800 miles), aiding in their sustainability goals. The making of the foam was also relatively simple, utilizing techniques widely used in cooking. This advantage in turn gave the researchers the ability to tweak the recipe in order to tune the foam's characteristics, such as density, squishiness, elasticity, water retention, colour, and scent. They were also able to imbue it with new properties, such as conductivity with the use of steel fibres, as well as heat and UV reactivity with the use of specific pigments. It does, however, have one quality that could be seen as a big limitation, the fact that it dissolves in water, is, in fact, one of its biggest assets. This makes it possible to reuse scraps by dissolving them, then cooking it again to boil the water away. It also makes biofoam easier to dispose of responsibly and compost. Thanks to its sustainability, ease of access, and ease of modification, biofoam is a material with many useful qualities. However, it is its capacity to dissolve, a uniquely ephemeral quality, that gives rise to particularly intriguing possibilities in interaction design, especially in artistic fields.

It is  in fact precisely this ephemeral nature that can help to engender particularly deep emotions and connections from people towards an object. By making it clear that an object will only exist for a limited amount of time, it situates that object within a particular context in time. Indeed objects can make their history rise to the literal and metaphorical surface by making marks of wear and tear clear. The desire for these kinds of objects are made clear by, for example, the rise of replicating the aesthetics of obsolete media in contemporary media. One prominent example is in video games. Since 2020 there has been collections of independent horror game demos called Haunted PS1 Demo Disc. These emulate specifically the look of PlayStation 1 games and the format of discs containing demos made for the console. [] This fascination with ephemerality and wear and tear is by no means new though. It is also the basis for the Japanese practice of kintsugi, whereby broken pottery is fixed with metal dust placed on the cracks, highlighting instead of hiding the piece's imperfections and history. These objects "convey simultaneously a sense of rupture and of continuity." [] Biofoam, of course, doesn't last as long and wouldn't accumulate this kind of wear and tear. However, if this dissolving is designed into the interaction with the object, biofoam has the potential to evoke similar feelings.

With this kind of response in mind, some fascinating themes and emotions can be explored in the design of ephemeral interactive works. An example I wish to highlight is the narrative video game Three Fourths Home. [] The game tells the story of a woman, named Kelly, who is driving home in the middle of a heavy storm. Along the way, she speaks on the phone with her family and they discuss long-brewing issues Kelly has with her parents regarding their disappointment in her lack of a clear career path, as well as her guilt surrounding it. Throughout the game, there is a mounting sense of dread as both Kelly and the storm get closer to the house. It explores themes of regret, endings, and inevitability. While the writing excels at evoking these themes, the experience is driven home by the unique choice to make the player hold down a button for Kelly to drive and the story to progress. If the player lets go of the button, the entire game slows down and pauses. With this simple interaction, the player is made painfully aware of the game's temporal context. They are made to feel the same dread that Kelly does, driving home its themes. They are made painfully aware of the fact that the game is ephemeral, that it has to end, and that Kelly must face what remains of her home.

While this video game is a world away from physical interaction design and biodegradable foam, it illustrates the capacity for ephemeral experiences to provoke strong emotions and reflection on unique themes within an audience. Researchers at the University of Lapland created a technique for projecting images on steam produced by a person's breath. Their participants commented that the effect was "exquisite" thanks to the projection living within the time frame of a breath. Biofoam's biodegradability and dissolving nature is incredible for its sustainability, but it should not be seen as a compromise. Instead, these unique opportunities for ephemeral experiences should be explored to their fullest extent.
