---
title: Exhibition Essay
tags: [ARTH 398]
created: 2024-10-21T20:58:20.838Z
modified: 2024-10-23T01:12:27.743Z
---

# Exhibition Essay


Upon entering the gallery space, I was immediately struck by the multitude of sounds that emerged from deeper into the hall. It was not loud, this was not the din of a busy room full of people talking. It was instead distinct sounds from various sources all playing at once. It was softly overwhelming in the way that entering someone's house for the first time can be. No one's shouting at me or demanding my attention, but a smell or the strange placement of everyday objects can nonetheless subtly disorient and intrigue me. This is what it was like to enter the exhibition _Un foyer aux portes ouvertes_, curated by Milton Riaño, which showcased three interactive multimedia portrayals of home from three different Latin American artists. The works were _Zapatistas_ by Amanda Ruiz Méndez, _No Me Demoro_, by Laura Caraballo, and _Bajareke / Série Esteras_ by Alexandra Gelis. The exhibition, via its layout and its selection of exclusively interactive artwork, works to foster strong connections between the works and the audience in order to broaden our ideas of home.

My initial impression of a lack of separation or hierarchy between the sounds that emerged from the works proved to be vital to the exhibition's layout, which emphasizes the connections between the pieces. Unlike a typical gallery or exhibit with a clear path through the space and delineation between pieces, the three works in _Un foyer aux portes ouvertes_ are presented with an open floor plan and no explicit order to the pieces. The spaces the works occupy have few walls in between them and multiple entrances and exits that lead from one piece to another. Thus, the pieces are presented with no hierarchy, all three of them to be considered equally. This reinforces themes in the works, such as in _Zapatistas_, which features an audio recording of indigenous women talking about how they consider mountains to be alive and just as worthy of consideration as other people or animals, abandoning any hierarchy between entities. Furthermore, even when viewing a piece, it is impossible for the others to be far from one's mind, as the open floor plan makes it so that the other works are near constantly in one's peripheral vision, as well as making each piece's sound suffuse the space. In so doing, the exhibition encourages the audience to make connections between the pieces, between each home presented by the artists. Indeed, much in the same way that the Zapatista women considered the mountains they lived near to be alive, we see a woman in *Bajareke* grieve the demolition of her home as if it were alive, and we see the way in which the house itself in *No Me Demoro* holds as much emotion as a person does. Through its open layout, *foyer* suggests that despite being materially different, there is more to connect the different homes than there is to divide them. 

Another important curatorial element of the exhibition is that all the works selected have an interactive element to them, in turns inviting one to connect with the piece on a more personal level, or meeting the piece on its own terms. *No Me Domo* is the clearest example of the former, as it consists partly of a videogame, allowing the audience member to explore Laura Caballo's childhood family home in Bogotá, The work goes further to place the audience inside of it, with elements of the memories spilling out into the gallery room, such as the texture from the couches printed out and pasted over the bench one sits on to play. The effect of this interactivity is even more clear in *Zapatistas*, which features cutout photos of Zapatista women in front of a projection of clay pots, arranged like mountain ranges. As audience members stand in front of it, their shadows form extensions of the range, along with the photos, suggesting that each element is part of a greater whole. Another interesting element of interactive pieces is that they require a non-trivial amount of work to fully engage with. As such, one is made to meet the work on its own terms and treat it with respect. *Bajareke*, for example, features a set of screens on the ground playing video of a man making an estera and a medicine bottle. They're not angled upwards at all, inviting one to sit down with the man and meet his gaze when he looks into the lens. Through these two effects of interactive artwork, the exhibition thus extends the connection from beyond the different works towards the audience member.

As I explored the house in *No Me Demoro*, there were many things about it that I recognized from my own childhood homes, such as the fence around the house or the flowers falling from the trees. It gave me a deep sense of comfort and melancholy as a fellow diaspora latina who misses Mexico. The other two works admittedly made me feel a little stranger at first. As *No Me Demoro* acknowledges, having the phrase "Los recuerdos son un privilegio del proprietario" projected over a maquette of the house, I am far more privileged than the people depicted in the other works. These weren't experiences I recognised and I even felt guilty about the difference. At the end of the day though, it was difficult to hold on to these feelings as I heard my baby brother explore the house in *No Me Demoro* while I listened to the woman mourning her own home in *Bajareke*. When the very layout is encouraging connection, it's hard to feel otherwise. I left feeling more than anything else, proud of the resilience of my fellow latines, and glad to have learned more about their homes.

