---
title: Final - prop rewriting
tags: [ENGL 255]
created: 2024-04-02T10:03:29.508Z
modified: 2024-04-05T15:12:22.139Z
---

# Final - prop rewriting

I will utilize close reading techniques, informed by performance theory, to explore how ritual imagery is invoked in order to illuminate the process of personal growth in the 2023 survival horror videogame *Alan Wake 2*, developed by Remedy Entertainment. *Alan Wake 2* focuses on the dual stories of its titular character, a tortured writer who has been trapped in a nightmare dimension called the Dark Place for over a decade, and Saga Anderson, an FBI detective pulled into Wake's horror story when she begins to investigate ritual murders seemingly related to Wake. 

My first argument will be establishing that Alan's attempts to escape the Dark Place are comparable to rituals. To do this, I will utilize both comparisons the game itself makes and the definition of ritual according to Richard Schechner's writings on performance theory. Alan's escape attempts consist of writing stories that form the basis for the game's events, as the Dark Place grants art reality-altering powers. Similarly, the most important differentiation between rituals and other kinds of performance is that rituals work to effect change, whereas other performances work to entertain (Schechner *An Introduction*, 159). One of the game's most significant bits of symbolism is the phrase "This is the ritual to lead you on". This refers specifically to rituals Alan reenacts by writing them into existence, but I will argue that it also applies to the game's events as a whole. Specifically, Alan is led towards his character arc of overcoming personal flaws. This is comparable to the concept of liminal rituals, which seek to effect or ease a transformation in the performer, much like Alan's character transformation.

My second argument is that the authoritative quality of rituals mirrors that of one's self-image. Unlike other kinds of performances, whose rules come from either oneself or a group of people, the rules for rituals come from an authority (Schechner, *Theory* 17). Throughout *AWII*, Alan makes repeated appeals to a similar set of authoritative rules: genre constraints. Specifically, he insists that horror stories only allow characters to fill two roles, monsters and victims. As a result, these are the only roles he writes himself into. Near the end of the game, the player and Alan learn that the game's primary antagonist, Mr. Scratch, has been Alan himself, a personification of Alan's self-obsessive and angry tendencies that he transforms into when possessed by the Dark Place. This mirrors how self-destructive behaviours have a nasty habit of reinforcing themselves as committing such actions can cause one to believe that they are fundamentally a bad person. This, in turn, allows one to abdicate responsibility for those actions in the first place. This statement of belief, that this is the role he must fill, grants itself the authority to make itself reality, much like art in the Dark Place.

My third argument is that one's self image is ultimately a construction, much like rituals, and thus, can be changed. Despite their seeming immutability, rituals are designed and change overtime based on the needs of their practitioners, or those with authority over them (Schechner, *Introduction* 160). In *AWII*, an important part of Alan's journey is learning that much in the same way, the constraints he works under are not immutable and even self-imposed. The first convention he breaks is that of the singular protagonist. This is central to the very popular structure of the monomyth, but it has been criticized for implying an individualistic world view (Bond). Throughout the game, Alan defies this by writing in Saga, a second and equal protagonist. In the game's climax, they work on the story's ending together, and she suggests that instead of being victims or monsters, they can be heroes, breaking with Alan's ideas of horror conventions. Thanks to breaking with these conventions, he learns to be less selfish, less self-obsessed, and escape his self-made prison.
