---
title: Final - WRitinGnggg...
tags: [ENGL 255]
created: 2024-04-30T20:29:28.971Z
modified: 2024-05-01T01:11:27.528Z
---

# Final - WRitinGnggg...

To start off, I will provide a short description of *Alan Wake II*'s plot. The game focuses on dual protagonists, the first being Alan himself. He is a novelist who has been trapped in a nightmare dimension called the Dark Place for over a decade. The Dark Place pulls from Alan's psyche, his memories and insecurities. For example, in one area of the game fashioned after the New York subway, all the signage is replaced with Alan's dialogue, as well as discouraging messages that read like negative self-talk ("Initiation 2: Casey"). The Dark Place doesn't simply pull from Alan's subconscious, however, its power can be harnessed through creative works of art, causing them to become reality, not just in the Dark Place, but in the real world outside as well. Thus, throughout the game, Alan writes stories that become the events of the game in order to navigate the Dark Place and ultimately escape. Unfortunately for Alan and those he includes in his writing, the Dark Place doesn't merely bring his stories to life, but twists them into horror stories, forcing Alan to write within the genre's conventions. Throughout his sections of the game, the player as Alan must write into existence gruesome ritualistic murder scenes in order for him to progress and move through the Dark Place. Echos of these horrific scenes then manifest in the real world as well, which is where the game's second protagonist comes in. Her name is Saga Anderson, an FBI detective pulled into Alan's horror story when she begins to investigate these murders around Caldera Lake, which functions as a threshold between the Dark Place and reality. She acts as a foil to Alan, her role as a detective piecing together stories a counterpoint to Alan's role creating them. She is also similarly out of her depth, leading an investigation for the first time and plunged into a supernatural world, but faces these challenges with more self-assurance than Alan.

The lens with which I will analyze the game and its depiction of ritual is that of Performance Theory, specifically the writings of Richard Schechner. Within his framework, ritual is one of a wide spectrum of human activity that makes up performance (*An Introduction*, 9). While he states that its many categories have fuzzy boundaries, the main difference that separates rituals from the other performances is that rituals are performed for the purpose of effecting change, whereas others simply entertain (76; 159). This change can be varied depending on the type of ritual, but of particular interest to me is the liminal ritual, which seeks to transform someone permanently. (150).
