---
title: Final - Writing
tags: [CART 210]
created: 2023-04-24T17:44:38.219Z
modified: 2023-04-29T15:20:24.808Z
---

# Final - Writing

In her book, Powers of Horror, Julia Kristeva develops the concept of abjection, which refers both to that which breaks down barriers, and our simultaneous reaction of repulsion and attraction to it. In her 2023 concept album, Married in Mount Airy, Nicole Dollanganger utilizes degraded nostalgia, both in text and form, in order to explore her protagonist's paradoxical relationship with the abject that haunts her. That being the rotting facade of a love twisted by abusive partners and capitalism.

The album tells the story of a woman, who I will refer to as the Bride, and her initially dreamy relationship with a man who proves to be anything but. While the record begins by painting an idyllic picture of its central couple, as it progresses, the Husband's abusive and ultimately murderous tendencies become progressively clear. On the third song, *Dogwood*, the Bride describes some sort of substance abuse and a reckless, stubborn nature. By the album's midpoint, on *Moonlite*, the Husband has become controlling and abusive towards her. He drunkenly tells her he has her "mounted on a wall in the back of [his] mind" and that he fantasizes of either fucking her or outright killing her. Although her ultimate fate isn't clear, the album heavily hints at her ultimately dying by his hand in the songs *Sometime After Midnight* and *Nymphs Finding the Head of Orpheus*.

The deceptive nature of the man's promises of love are well reflected by the album's namesake, Mount Airy Lodge, a once famous honeymoon resort. It featured such romantic (read: kitschy) amenities as heart-shaped bathtubs and mirrored ceilings above the beds. A well-remembered ad jingle for it (quoted in the album's title track and shared by Dollanganger on social media) proclaimed that all guests needed to bring was "their love of everything." Today, the resort is long gone. After a steady decline throughout the eighties and nineties, it eventually closed in 2001 and was replaced by a casino resort that shares only its name with the original resort, as the original building was demolished. In the record, it's the dream that the Bride remembers, as she was married there "in its prime, sometime in the late sixties." Both the resort and the Bride's husband promised the dream of a perfect romance, despite both being ultimately interested in something else, money and control, respectively. The fact that it exists now only as a memory, a ghost, does not escape Dollanganger though.

An overly nostalgic and romanticized view of romance and the resort is not one the album presents. Instead, the album takes a more hauntological approach. Hauntological art is described by Mark Fisher as work that is "suffused with an overwhelming melancholy" for a promised rosy future that will never come to pass. It's a sense that time has broken down. Ghosts make for a great metaphor for this as they are traces of people and traumatic events that break time in the way that they retain power and affect the present in their absence. 
\ It's a nostalgia for the past where that future seemed possible. \

in *Mount Airy*, the Bride is haunted by the love promised to her by her Husband, while the reality of her situation eats away at that promise. Representative of this is the album's opening title track, which depicts her marriage at Mount Airy Lodge. In some ways, this is the happiest moment on the entire record, but it's only a fading memory. The first thing heard on the track is a guitar that randomly shifts out of tune, as if it were being played on an old tape. The title track is also one of only two songs on the entire record written in the past tense. Indeed, the Bride can't "recall what [they] were drinking." She even references a famous 90's ad for the resort which featured the catchphrase "all you have to bring is your love of everything," but she says they were married in the sixties. This memory, in and of itself beginning to rot and increasingly melancholic, haunts the rest of the record.

Despite all the abuse she suffers, for the majority of the record, the Bride seems unable to pull herself away from him, still enamoured with his promise of love, despite the increasing premonitions of danger. On the aforementioned *Dogwood*, she prays for God to not let him die and denies his faults, telling God she "[refuses] to understand that he just makes his own bed". In a hauntological move, she seems to continually foresee her own death at his hands and even romanticize it. On *My Darling True* she proclaims she'd "love it so, If [he'd] hold [her ]'til [she's] cold and blue." Even once she fully realizes the harm he causes her, the idea of escape isn't an option. On the penultimate song, *Nymphs Finding the Head of Orpheus*, she's full of rage towards him, but says she used to dream of them killing each other. It's not entirely clear, but it's implied she dies during this song.

Furthering the hauntological analysis, the Bride herself becomes a ghost. In the album's last full song (but penultimate track), *Whispering Glades*, the Bride imagines her Husband's burial. She describes him as "dead and buried with a smile painted on [his] face." On a metaphorical level, this is a reference to his deceitful nature, but on a literal level, his smile is painted on because he's dead; a mortician has given him this smile. At the end of the song, the Bride describes that unlike the other mourners, she'll have "a smile painted on [her] face." She too has died. 

Tragically though, ghosts don't get to move on. In the album's last track, an outro/interlude, the Bride has seemingly forgotten the abuse or her Husband's death, as she waits for him to call. After a few short verses, the song transitions into the same old, distorted tape recording of an acoustic guitar from the very first song, *Married In Mount Airy*. The cycle repeats, and the Bride thus forever relives the events that led to her death, over and over again. 

In Hito Steyerl's essay In Defense of Poor Images, she explores how poor media sacrifices quality for spread, virality. This rapid spread allows the poor media to form networks of visual bonds. Nicole Dollanganger herself came up in one such community on Tumblr, fascinated with low-quality imagery of decaying nostalgia. To this day, she continues to build on these ideas. This community centred around nostalgic poor images runs contrary and parallel to a general push of nostalgia in mass media: an endless race to harness and sanitize intellectual property in remake after sequel after spinoff. Dollanganger and others like her, however, refuse to give up the ghost. They stare unflinching at the material, the corpses and maggots, in order to gain new insight from the ghosts that haunt us.
