Final - Writing I guessʔ.md, before:

---
title: Final - Writing I guessʔ
tags: [ENGL 255]
created: 2024-03-18T03:07:08.242Z
modified: 2024-03-18T04:34:20.935Z
---

# Final - Writing I guessʔ

## Outline
- topic
	- relationship of games to rituals
- clearly define key terms
	- ritual
	- gameplay loop
	- 
- identify a case study
	- Alan Wake 2
- state your main argument(s)
	- The game invokes the concept of rituals to illuminate the process of change
		- spiral as a nesting doll of rituals (ritualistically engaging in bad behaviour, recognising bad behaviour and source, working to change it, restarting, non-linear)
		- needing to reapeat in order to enact to enact change slowly (memetic set of actions)
		- A ritual carries authority with it, but it is an authority that can be changed over time
		- Where does this authority come from? For ALan, it is internal, so he has the power to directly change it
		- But also, because it is internal, without external help, he is ultimately doomed to only repeat and never truly change
		- Saga (Alice) teaches him the importance of writing your own story
- why your topic and/or argument matters.
	-

Commit message:

engl 255 - finally started writing ! also + notes

Final - Writing I guessʔ.md, after:

---
title: Final - Writing I guessʔ
tags: [ENGL 255]
created: 2024-03-18T03:07:08.242Z
modified: 2024-03-18T20:24:05.597Z
---

# Final - Writing I guessʔ

## Outline
- topic
	- Use of ritual imagery
- clearly define key terms
	- see bolded words
-  case study
	- Alan Wake 2
- state your main argument(s)
	- The game invokes the concept of rituals to illuminate the process of personal growth
		- spiral as a nesting doll of rituals (ritualistically engaging in bad behaviour, recognising bad behaviour and source, working to change it, restarting, non-linear)
			- Repeating **liminoid** rituals, creating a **liminal** ritual
		- Needing to perform ritual repetitively in order to enact change slowly /
		Needing an archetype to follow, a destiny
			- **Restored behaviour**, set of pre-established actions
			- **Hero's journey**
		- A ritual carries authority and rules with it, but these are not fixed
		- Where does this authority come from? For Alan, it is internal, so he has the power to directly change it
		- But also, because it is internal, without external help, he is ultimately doomed to only repeat and never truly change
			- Unable to escape the framing of himself as victim/monster
		- Saga (Alice) teaches him the importance of writing your own story
			- Collaboration, different perspectives, alternative to monomyth
- why your topic and/or argument matters.
	- Understanding why this game connected with me
	- Blurring between art and ritual
		- **Efficacy**

## Writing!!! 😱

I will utilize performance theory and narratology to explore how ritual imagery is invoked in order to illuminate the processes of personal growth and art creation in the 2023 survival horror videogame *Alan Wake 2*, developed by Remedy Entertainment. *Alan Wake 2* focuses on the dual stories of its titular character, a tortured writer who has been trapped in a nightmare dimension called the Dark Place for over a decade, and Saga Anderson, an FBI detective pulled into Wake's horror story when she begins to investigate ritual murders seemingly related to Wake. Wake's character arc and actions throughout the game are directly compared to a ritual process, as he attempts to write a story to escape the Dark Place. Throughout his portions of the game, he repeatedly writes new stories about ritual murders, effectively recreating these rituals due to the Dark Place embuing art with reality-altering powers. However, he believes that he must stick to the genre conventions of horror, which he believes permit for characters to be only monsters and victims
